---
layout: default
title: John Barnette
---

## 2012 &mdash; Now: GitHub

## 2009 &mdash; 2012: CTO, Audiosocket

Built the technology strategy, team, and infrastructure from scratch.

## 2009: Lead Software Engineer, AT&T Interactive

Working directly for the Executive Director of Web Development with a
small team of Ruby/Rails experts. Spending a lot of time helping ATTi
solidify coding standards, deployment processes, and general software
quality.

## 2007 &mdash; 2009: Lead Software Engineer, AdReady

Lead software engineer on a large Rails app, shepherded from 1.x to
2.x. Extracted a fair amount of work into open source projects,
including features for Rails (2.0 fixtures, timestamped migrations)
and RubyGems (development dependencies). Designed a complex
subdomain/skinning system and capabilities model. Refactored code that
would make most engineers run for the hills (and survived).

## 2005 &mdash; 2007: Lead Software Engineer, ODS Software

Technical and architecture lead on a large CRM/warehouse
management/financial/ transactional application for the lumber and
building materials industry. Tackled and conquered serious internal
challenges, including a lack of process and quality engineering and an
inexperienced development team. The product is now developed using a
fast, iterative process, with good source control and build systems,
and a vastly more knowledgeable/better trained development team.

## 2002 &mdash; 2005: Senior Software Engineer, Polycom

Senior architecture and development work on a carrier-class 11 million
LoC C++/Java application. Thought leader and advocate for agile and
test-ﬁrst development. Architected and led development of a C#/.NET
distributed monitoring and operator assistance application with
stringent performance and bandwidth requirements. Architecture and
development of a next-generation J2EE-based platform for media
conferencing and collaboration applications. Participated in
signiﬁcant company-wide architectural and strategic
decisions. Championed lightweight, pragmatic development processes,
defect tracking, and continuous integration.

## 1999 &mdash; 2002: Senior Software Engineer, XOR

Client contact (both technical and LOB) during presales and
architecture/design discussions. Designed and led development of large
Java and Perl web applications (Weblogic, Websphere). Internal
champion of lightweight, pragmatic development process and code
sharing/modular development. Executive liaison and general technical
go-to guy.

## 1998 &mdash; 1999: Software Engineer, Exabyte

Developed high-performace SCSI drivers and software for large-scale
tape/data storage libraries. Developed remote tape library control
capabilities and user interface. Developed web management portal for
information storage and library management.
